Overclocking, is the process of
increasing the clock frequency of
the device beyond
the recommended frequency.
So, they call it overclocking.
Now, that term is sometimes
misused in my opinion.
Overclocking also sometimes
is used to refer to
increasing the internal voltage
levels to increase the speed.
A better term for that
would be overvolting.
But overclocking is
where you are increasing
the clock frequency and
to increase the speed of
the performance of the chip.
So, one thing to note
is that when you're talking
about overclocking,
there's more than one clock
inside one of these devices.
So, for instance, a typical
board say, Raspberry Pi.
It's got several clocks.
There is a clock
going into the chip,
into the main
processor but there's
a system clock that's for
the rest of the components on
the board and the rate base be.
By the way, system
clock rate is always
slower or the magnitude
slower than the clock
rate of the chip.
Because communication from
chip to chip is slower.
So, you have to slow
down the clock rate.
Also, even internally
in the processor
inside the microcontroller
or microprocessor,
whichever it is, there are
multiple clocks inside there.
So, there's one high-speed
clock coming in,
but there are different what
they call clock domains.
Different regions
of the chip which
can run at different
clock frequencies.
So, it's a little bit
simple to just say,
"I'm just going to
be at the clock."
Which clock you talking about?
But we're assuming right now
assuming all the clocks,
basically the one high-speed
clock that goes into
the microprocessor that is
being used to create
all the rest of the clock.
So, you can assume
all the clocks on
chip are going up together.
So, what's the impact
of overclocking?
Now, the first obvious impact
is it instructions are
executed more quickly.
So, roughly there's
one instruction
per clock period
and I say roughly
because this is vastly
simplifying what goes on
inside Computer Architecture.
I'm hiding tons of parallelism
and pipelining and all sorts
of details like that.
But roughly, a component
can only do one thing
at one time.
So, if you've got
one adder is going to do
one add instruction
in a clock cycle.
You've got one multiplier
is going to do one
multiply instruction in
clock cycle and so on.
So, it happens per clock cycle.
Each one house per clock cycle.
So, roughly you're speeding
up the rate at which
instructions are executed.
Now, there's a downside though,
because even if I say,
"Wow, why don't I
just crank it up forever?"
So, there's a limit to this.
Signals have a shorter
time in which to travel.
So, what I mean by this is that,
and this is my quick overview
of synchronous circuit design.
So, there are what are called
flip-flops inside these devices.
A flip-flop is part
of a register,
a flip-flop [inaudible]
storage elements.
It stores one bit
a zero or a one.
We talk about D flip-flops
is to a one-bit 01.
Each one of these flip-flops
receives a clock,
and remember that the clock is
just a waveform
that's low then high,
then low then high square wave
over time at some frequency.
So, what happens with
these flip-flops is,
they can load a new value.
Every time the
clock edge goes up,
every time it goes
from low to high.
They can load a new value.
So, the rate of which they load
new values like you
might have an adder,
and there is a flip flop at
the output of the adder.
There's a set of
flip-flops that hold
the result of the addition.
If the rate at which they load
new values is the rate at which
the addition operations
are happening.
The maximum is the best rate
at which it can happen?
Because if it loads
one every second,
then there's one addition
happening every second.
One additional result is
captured every second?
So, the trick though is that,
saying you've got
an adder, take an adder.
The adder has some flip-flops
as input holding some numbers
that you want to add,
and then it's got
flip-flops that at
his output that hold
the result of the addition.
So, let's say
the clock edge goes up
and new numbers get
loaded into the input
redshifts for the adder.
Then the adder starts
performing the addition.
The result has to be
completed by the time
the next clock edge goes up.
The reason for that is because
the register at the output set
of flip-flops to
the output of the adder,
they have to have
the right result there when
the clock edge goes up when
they load in the new values.
If the adder doesn't finish
in that time between
the clock edges,
then these result registers
in the output of the adder,
are going to catch
the wrong data.
Then you're going
to have garbage.
Basically that's failure.
When that happens, then
the whole machine fails.
Weird things happen and you
get the blue screen of death.
There's Windows or
whatever. Things fail.
So, the delay across
these components like an adder,
determine the fastest clock
frequency you can have.
So, because as you increase
the clock frequency,
you reduce the time
between the clock edges.
That gives you less time to do
each computation like an add.
Now, at some point
you're going to hit
a limit where errors
start happening.
Where there isn't enough time,
the result registers
get the wrong data
and your system fails.
The question is
where is that point?
Now, what happens typically
when chips are manufactured,
as they manufacture them and
then they test them to see
what is the fastest rate at which
they work and they don't fail.
They test them at
different clock like at
a high clock frequency
that is called speed
binning, by the way.
They test them at
a higher clock frequency
and see if it fails.
If it doesn't fail,
then they sell it at,
they cut off 15 percent or
10-15 percent of
that clock frequency
and sell it at that rate.
Usually what happens is, you
test it a high clock frequency,
it fails because of weird delays.
They tested a lower,
lower, lower, until
finally it works.
Wherever that clock frequency is,
then they may be cutoff like
10 percent of the clock
frequency something like that.
To be safe, it's sort of
a boundary and then
they sell it at that.
Now, this boundary that's
sort of a margin that they use
cutting up 10- 15 percent.
When you are overclocking, you
are eating into that margin.
You're saying, well I'm going
to add 10 more percent in.
That may work, it may not.
Basically, this is
all probabilistic.
Maybe that works
most of the time.
But every once in
a while, you just crash.
Because there's a timing error.
Some result doesn't
reach a register fast
enough and bam
everything crashes.
So, that's what you're
doing with overclocking.
So, there's always this risk
that everything is going to fail.
It's just the more you
overclock, the higher the risk.
Also another thing is,
that when you overclock
the temperature of
the device increases.
This happens because switching
signals going from low to high,
high to low it uses
power and it makes heat,
and so the temperature of
the device just gets higher,
and that's going to
generally shorten
the lifetime of
your component because
as it heats up it can
only dissipate heat
at a certain rate.
If you've ever seen
inside a motherboard,
you seen these heat sinks
that they attach to these devices
big old things of metal
that dissipate the heat.
They can only dissipate
heat at a certain rate.
Assuming fan cooling, you
have a fan that blows
over it and they can only
dissipate at a certain rate,
and by the way Raspberry Pi,
they don't have that.
They don't have a fan.
They don't have
heat sinks attached to
the process or any of that.
So, they're not good
at dissipating heat.
In fact, my Raspberry Pi
gets quite hot.
I mean hot to the touch.
You'll notice if you
tried doing something
with it for awhile,
touch that thing.
When I do computationally
intensive stuff with it,
you touch the chip, it's
actually hot like you
don't want to touch it.
That damages it over time
and eventually fails.
Increasing voltage. So,
another thing is overvolting.
You can do in people
who often lump that in
with overclocking, but
it is a different thing.
So, increasing the voltage swing.
So, instead of going from 0-3.3,
you'd go 0-5 or
something like this.
Typically, the voltage
swing on the chip
the I/O is different than
the voltage swing on
the individual processor,
it's usually lower
on the processor.
But increasing the voltage swing
can increase
the transistor speed.
If you increase the swing go
to a much higher voltage,
then it takes less time
to fill it with
current essentially.
Really simplify. So, increase
voltage swing could speed it up.
But energy consumption is
proportional to the square
of the voltage.
So you increase voltage and you
are greatly increasing
energy consumption.
Now, if you plugged into
the wall maybe you don't care.
But if you are using a battery
then that's a problem.
Thermal effects can alter timing.
So, when I say thermal effects,
remember all this
switching that is
actually increasing
energy consumption
which is making more heat,
and that he can alter timing.
So, he can change timing in
funny ways and we're not
going to get into the class.